"Welcome to the Artificial Intelligence podcast. My name is Lex Friedman. I'm a research scientist at MIT If you would like to skip ahead to the conversation with Christo Co, I start introducing him at about the one minute and 32nd mark. This podcast is an extension of the courses on deep learning autonomous vehicles and artificial general intelligence that have taught and organized. It is not only about machine learning or robotics or neuroscience or philosophy or any one technical field, it considers all these avenues of thought in a way that is hopefully accessible to everyone. The aim here is to explore the nature of human and machine intelligence. The big picture of understanding the human mind and creating echoes of it in the machine. To me, that is one of our civilization's most challenging and exciting scientific journeys into the unknown. I will first repost parts of previous youtube conversations and lecture Q and A's that can be listened to without video. If you want to see the video version, please go to my youtube channel, my user name there on Twitter and everywhere else is Lex Friedman spelled Fr ID without the E. So reach out and connect. If you find these conversations interesting. In this episode, I talk with Christof Koch, who is one of the seminal figures in the fields of neurobiology, neuroscience and generally in the study of consciousness. He's the president and Chief Scientific Officer of the Allen Institute of Brain Science in Seattle from 1986 until 2013. He was a professor at Caltech. His work has received over 100,000 citations. He's the author of several books, including Consciousness Confessions of a romantic reductionist. His research, his writing, his ideas have had a big impact on the scientific community and the general public in the way we think about consciousness and in the way we think of ourselves as human beings. I enjoyed and learned a lot from this conversation. I hope you do as well. Ok. Before we delve into the beautiful mysteries of consciousness, let's zoom out a little bit and let me ask, do you think there's intelligent life out there in the universe? Uh Yes, I do believe so. We have no evidence of it, but I think the probabilities are overwhelming in favor of it. Given the universe where we have 10 to the 11 Galaxies and each galaxy has between 10 to 1110 to the 12 stars. And we know most stars have one or more planets. So how does that make you feel? It still makes me feel special because I have experiences, I feel the world I experience the world and, uh, independent of whether there are other creatures out there. I still feel the world and I have access to this world in this very strange compelling way. And that's the core of human existence. Now, you said human, do you think if those intelligent creatures are out there, do you think they experience their world, they are evolved, if they are a product of natural evolution as they would have to be, they will also experience their own world. The consciousness isn't just a human. You're right. It's, it's much wider. It's probably it may be spread across all of biology. We have the only thing that we have special is we can talk about it. Of course, not all people can talk about it. Babies and little Children can talk about it. Patients who have, who have a stroke and let's see, the left inferior frontal child can't talk about it, but most normal adult people can talk about it. And so we think that makes us special compared to little monkeys or dogs or cats or mice or all the other creatures that we share the planet with. But all the evidence seems to suggest that they too experience the world. And so it's overwhelmingly likely that other aliens, that aliens would also experience their world. Of course, differently because they have a different sensorium, they have different sensors, they have a very different environment. But the fact that I I would strongly suppose that they also have experiences, they feel pain and pleasure and see in some sort of spectrum and hear and have all the other senses. Of course, their language, if they have one would be different. So we might not be able to understand their poetry about the experiences that they have. That's correct. Right. So, in a talk in a video, I've, I've heard you mention Saputo a Dax hound that you came up with that you grew up with, it was part of your family when you were young. Uh First of all, you're technically a midwestern boy. You just technically, but uh after that, you traveled around a bit. Hence a little bit of the accent, you talked about Saputo, the DAO having these elements of humanness of consciousness that you discovered. So I, I just wanted to ask, can you look back in your childhood and remember when was the first time you realized you yourself sort of from a third person perspective or are conscious being this idea of, you know, stepping outside yourself and seeing there's something special going on here in my brain. I can't really, actually, it's a good question. I'm not sure I recall a discrete moment. I mean, you take it for granted because that's the only world, you know, the only world I know, you know, is the world of seeing and hearing voices and touching and all the other things. So it's only much later at early in my unguided days when I became um when I enrolled in physics and in philosophy that I really thought about it and thought, well, this is really fundamentally very, very mysterious and there's nothing really in physics right now that explains this transition from the physics of the brain to feelings, where do the feelings come in? Right. So you can look at the foundational equation of quantum mechanics general relativity, you can look at the period table of the elements. You can, you can look at the endless A TG seat chat in our genes and nowhere is consciousness. Yet I wake up every morning to a world where I have experiences. And so that's the heart of the ancient mind body problem. How do experiences get into the world? So what is consciousness experience, consciousness is any any con any experience? Some people call it subjective feeling. Some people call it phenomenon phenomenology. Some people call it quality of the philosopher, but they all denote the same thing. It feels like something in the famous word of the philosopher Thomas Nagel. It feels like something to be a bad or to be uh you know, um um uh an American or to be angry or to be sad or to be in love or to have pain. And that is what experience is any possible experience could be as mundane as just sitting in a chair, could be as exalted as you know, having a mystical moment. Uh you know, in, in deep meditation, those are just different forms of experiences, experience. So if you were to sit down with maybe the next skip a couple of generations of IBM Watson, something that won jeopardy. What is the gap? I guess the question is between Watson, uh that might be much smarter than you, than us, than all any human alive, but may not have experience. What is the gap? Well, so that's a big, big question that's occupy people for the last, um, certainly the last 50 years since we, you know, since the advent, the birth of um, of computers, that's a question Alan Turing tried to answer. And of course, he did it in this indirect way by proposing its test, an operational test. So, but that's not really, that's, you know, he tried to get it. What does it mean for a person to think? And then he had this test, right? You lock them away and then you have a communication with them and then you try to, to guess after a while whether that is a person or whether it's a computer system, there's no question that now or very soon, you know, Alexa or Siri or, you know, Google now will pass this test, right? And you can game it. But, you know, ultimately, certainly in your generation, there will be machines that will speak with complete poise, that will remember everything you ever said. They'll remember every email you ever had like like Samantha? Remember in the movie her? There's no question is gonna happen. But of course, the key question is does it feel like anything to be Samantha in the movie her or does it feel like anything to be Watson? And there one has to very um very strongly think there are two different concepts here that we call mingle. There is a concept of intelligence, natural or artificial and there is a concept of consciousness of experience, natural or artificial. Those are very, very different things. Now, historically, we associate consciousness with intelligence. Why? Because we live in a world leaving aside computers of of natural selection where we are surrounded by creatures, either our own kin that are less or more intelligent or we go across feces. Some, some are more adapted to a particular environment. Others are less adapted, whether it's a whale or a dog or you go talk about a permeti or a little worm. All right. And, and we see the complexity of the nervous system goes from one cell to, to specialized cells to a worm that has three net that has 30% of cells are nerve cells to creature like us or like a blue whale that has 100 billion, even more nerve cells. And so based on behavioral evidence and based on the underlying neuroscience, we believe that as these creatures become more complex, they are better adapted to, to their particular ecological niche. And they become more conscious partly because their brain grows. And we believe consciousness, unlike the ancient, ancient people thought most, almost every culture thought that consciousness with intelligence has to do with your heart. And you still say that today, you see, honey, I love you with all my heart. But what you should actually say is you say no, honey, I love you with all my lateral hypothalamus. And for Valentine's Day, you should give your sweetheart. Uh uh you know, uh hypothalamic piece of chocolate, not a heart shaped chocolate, right? Anyway, so we still have this language, but now we believe it's a brain. And so we see brains of different complexity and we think, well, they have different levels of consciousness, they're capable of different experiences. Um But now we confront the world where we know where we're beginning to engineer intelligence and it's radical unclear whether the intelligence we're engineering has anything to do with consciousness and whether it can experience anything because fundamentally what's the difference, intelligence is about function intelligence, no matter exactly how you define it, sort of adaptation to new environments, being able to learn and quickly understand you, you know the setup of this and what's going on and who are the actors and what's gonna happen next? That's all about function consciousness is not about function consciousness is about being, it's in some sense much fundamental. You can see you can see this in, in several cases, you can see it, for instance, in the case of the clinic, when you're dealing with patients who are, let's say had a stroke or had, were in traffic accident, et cetera. They're pretty much immobile. Terry Sho you may have heard historically, she was a person here in the, in the nineties, in Florida, her heart stood still. She was reanimated and for the next 14 years she was what's called in a vegetative state. There are thousands of people in the vegetative state. So they, you know, they are, you know, they're like this occasionally, they, they open their eyes for 234568 hours and then close their eyes. They have sleep wake cycle. Occasionally they have behaviors, they do like uh you know, but there's no way that you can establish a lawful relationship between what you say or the doctor says or the mom says and what the patient does. So, so the, so the there isn't any behavior yet in some of these people, there is still experience. You can, you can uh design and build brain machine interfaces where you can see there's they, they still experience something. And of course, there are these cases of locked in state. There's this famous book called The the The Diving Bell and The Butterfly where you had an editor, a French editor, he had a stroke in the in the brain stem, unable to move except his vertical eyes, eye movement. He could just move his eyes up and down and he dictated an entire book and some people even lose this at the end. And all the evidence seems to suggest that they're still in there. So in this case, you have no behavior, you have consciousness. Second case is tonight, like all of us, you're going to go to sleep, close your eyes, you go to sleep, you will wake up inside your sleeping body and you will have conscious experiences. They are different from everyday experience. You might fly, you might not be surprised that you're flying. You might meet a long dead pet childhood dog and you're not surprised that you're meeting them, you know, but you have conscious experience of love of hate, you know, they can be very emotional. Your body during this state typically state sends an active signal to your motor neurons to paralyze you. It's called Atonia, right? Because if you don't have that like some patients, what do you do? You act out your dreams you get, for example, behavioral disorder, which is a bad, which is bad Juju to get. Ok. Third case is pure experience. So I recently had this what some people call a mystical experience. I went to Singapore and went into a flotation tank, right? So this is a big tub filled with, with water that's body temperature and absent salt. You strip completely naked, you lie inside of it, you close the the the darkness, complete darkness, soundproof so, very quickly, you become body less because you're floating and you're naked, you have no rings, no watch, no nothing. You don't feel your body anymore. There's no sound soundless. There's no uh photon uh sightless. Timeless because after a while early on, you actually hear your heart. But then that you, you, you sort of adapt to that and then sort of the passage of time ceases. And if you train yourself like in a, in a meditation, not to think early on, you think a lot, it's a little bit spooky. You feel somewhat uncomfortable or you think, well, I'm gonna get bored. But if you try to not to think actively, you become mindless. So there you are body less timeless, you know, soundless, sightless, mindless, but you're in a conscious experience, you're not asleep, you're not asleep. You are, you, you are being a pure, you are pure being. There isn't any function. You aren't doing any computation, you're not remembering, you're not projecting, you're not planning yet. You are fully conscious, you're fully conscious, there's something going on there. It could be just a side effect. So what is the, the um you mean EpiPen Nomenon? So what's the meaning? Why uh what is the function of you being able to lay in this uh sensory free deprivation tank and still have a conscious experience? Obviously, we didn't evolve with flotation tanks in our, in our environment. I mean, so biology is not totally bad at asking why question? Telenor question, why do we have two eyes? Why don't we have four eyes, like some teachers or three eyes or something? Well, no, there there's probably there is a function to that but it's we're not very good at answering those questions. We can speculate and Leslie where biology is very or science is very good about mechanistic question. Why is that charge in the universe? Right? We find a certain universe where there are positive and negative charges? Why? Why does quantum mechanics hold, you know why, why, why doesn't some other uh theory hold quantum mechanics hold in our universe is very unclear why? So telenor question, why questions are difficult to answer clearly, there's some relationship between complexity, brain processing power and consciousness. But however, in these cases, in the three examples, I I gave one is an everyday experience at night. The other one is a, you know, Tom and the third one is in principle, you can, everybody can have these sort of mystical experiences. You have a dissociation of function form of intelligence from um uh from conscious no consciousness. You caught me asking a white question. Uh Let me ask a question. That's not a wide question. You're giving a talk later today on the Turing test for intelligence and consciously drawing lines between the two. So is there a scientific way to say there's consciousness present in this entity or not and to anticipate your answer? Because you, you will also there's a neurobiological answer. So we can test a human brain. But if you take a machine brain that you don't know, tests for yet, uh how would you even begin to approach a test if there's consciousness present in this thing? OK. That's a really good question. So let me take in two steps. So as you point out for, for, for, for humans, let's just stick with humans. There's now a test called the zap and zip. It's a procedure where you ping the brain using transcranial magnetic stimulation. You look at the electrical reverberations essentially using eg and then you can measure the complexity of this brain response and you can do this in awake people in a sleep, normal people, you can do it in awake people and then anesthetize them, you can do it in patients and it, it, it has 100% accuracy that in all those cases, when you're clear the patient or the person is either conscious or unconscious, the complexity is either high or low. And then you can adopt these techniques to similar creatures like monkeys and dogs and, and, and mice that have very similar brains. Now, of course, you, you point out that may not help you because we don't have a cortex, you know, and if I send a magnetic pulse into my iphone or my computer, it's probably gonna break something. So we don't have that. So what we need ultimately, we need a theory of consciousness. We can't just rely on our intuition. Our intuition is well, yeah, if somebody talks, they're conscious, however, then there are all these Children, babies don't talk, right? But we believe that that the babies also have conscious experiences, right? And then there are all these patients I mentioned, um and they don't talk when you dream, you can't talk because you're paralyzed. So, so what what we ultimately need, we can't just rely on our intuition. We need a theory of conscience that tells us what is it about a piece of matter? What is it about a piece of highly excitable matter like the brain or like a computer that gives rise to conscious experience. We all believe none of us believe anymore in the old story. It's a soul that used to be the most common explanation that most people accept that. And still a lot of people today believe. Well, there's a as God endowed only us with a special thing that animals don't have. Rene dear. Famously said a dog if you hit it with your carriage may yell, may cry, but it doesn't have this special thing. It doesn't have the magic, the magic sauce, it doesn't have Red CO D. So now we believe that isn't the case anymore. So what is the difference between brains and, and these guys silicon and um in particular once their behavior matches? So if you have Siri or Alexa in 20 years from now that she can talk just as good as any possible human. What counts do you have to say she's not conscious in particular, if she says of course, she will. Well, of course, I'm conscious. You ask her, how are you doing? And she'll say, well, you know, they'll generate some way to, of course, she'll behave like a, like a person. Now, there are several differences. One is, so this relates to the problem. The the the very hard, why is consciousness a hard problem? It's because it's subjective, right? Only I have it for only I know I have direct experience of my own consciousness. I don't have experience in your consciousness. Now, I assume as a sort of a Asian person who believes in probability theory and all of that, you know, I can do, I can do an abduction to the to the best available facts. I deduce your brain is very similar to mine. If I put you in a scanner, your brain is roughly gonna behave the same way as I do. If, if, if you know, if I gave you this mu and ask you, how does it taste? You? Tell me things that you know, that, that I would also say more or less. So I infer based on all of that, that you're conscious now with, sir, I can do that. So there, I really need a theory that tells me what is it about any system, this or this that makes it conscious. We have such a theory. Yes. So the integrated information theory. But let me first, maybe an introduction for people who are not familiar the car. Can you, you talk a lot about pan uh panpsychism? Can you describe what uh physical versus dualism this? You mentioned the soul? What, what is the history of that idea? What the idea of Panych? Oh No, the debate really out of which Panpsychism can um emerge of, of, of um dualism versus uh physical or do you not see uh panpsychism as fitting into that? You can argue there's some, well, OK, so let's step back. So, Panpsychism is a very ancient belief that's been around. Uh I mean, Plato and Aristotle talks about it. Uh modern philos talk about it. Of course, in Buddhism, the idea is very prevalent that I mean, there are different versions of it. One version says everything is in salt, everything rocks and stones and dogs and people and forests and iphones, all of us, all all matter is in salt. That's sort of one version. Another version is that all biology, all creatures small or large from a single cell to a giant sequoia tree feel like something that's the one I think is somewhat more realistic. Um So the different, what do you mean by feel like something have, have feelings, have some kind of, it's like some, it may well be possible that it feels like something to be a parames. I think it's pretty likely it feels like something to be a bee or a mouse or a dog. Sure. So OK, so, so that you can say that's also so Pansy is very broad and you can, so some people, for example, uh Bertram Russell try to advocate this this idea, it's called Russel and Monism that that Pansy is really physics viewed from the inside. So the idea is that physics is very good at describing relationship among objects like charges or like gravity, right? You know, describe the relationship between curvature and mass distribution. OK. That's the relationship among things. Physics doesn't really describe the ultimate reality itself. It's just relationship among, you know, quarks or all these other stuff like a third person observer. Yes. Yes. And consciousness is what physics feels from the inside. So my conscious experiences, it's the way the physics of my brain, particularly my cortex feels from the inside. And so if you are paramecium, you got to remember you say parameter. Well, that's a pretty dumb creature. It is, but it has already a billion different molecules, probably, you know, 5000 different proteins assembled in a highly highly complex system that no single person, no computer system so far on this planet has ever managed to accurately simulate its complexity actually escapes us. Yes. And it may well be that that little thing feels like a tiny bit now. It doesn't have a voice in the head. Like me, it doesn't have expectations, you know, it doesn't have all that complex things but it may well feel like something. Yeah. So this is really interesting. Can we draw some lines and maybe try to understand the difference between life, intelligence and consciousness? How do you see all of those, if you had to define what is a living thing? What is a conscious thing and what is an intelligent thing? Do those intermix for you or are they totally separate? OK. So a that's a question that we don't have a full answer. A lot of the stuff we're talking about today is full of mysteries and fascinating ones, right? Well, folks, I mean, you can go to Aristotle who's probably the most important scientists and philosophers ever lived in, certainly in western culture. He had this idea. It's called hylo mph. It's quite popular these days that there are different forms of soul. The soul is really the form of something he, he says all biological creatures have a vegetative soul. That's life principle. Today, we think we understand something more that it's biochemistry in nonlinear thermodynamics, right? Then he said they have a sensitive soul. Only um animals and humans have also a sensitive soul or aet of soul. They, they can see they can smell and they have drives, they want to reproduce, they want to eat, et cetera. And then only humans have what he called a rational soul. OK. And, and that idea that made it into Christen Dome and then the rational soul is the one that lives forever. He was very unclear. He wasn't really, I mean, different readings of Aristotle give different whether did he believe that rational soul was immortal or not? I probably think he didn't. But then of course, I made it into a plato into Christianity and then the soul became immortal and then became the, the connection after to God. Now you, you, so you asked me essentially what that's our modern conception of these three Ar Aristotle would have called them different forms, life. We think we know something about it, at least life on this planet, right? Although we don't understand how to originate it, but it's, it's been difficult to rigorously pin down. You see this in modern definitions of death. It's in fact, right now, there's a conference ongoing again that tries to define legally and medically. What is death? It used to be very simple. Death is you stop breathing, your heart stops beating, you're dead, right? Totally uncontroversial. If it's, if you're unsure, you wait another 10 minutes. If the patient doesn't breathe, you know, he's dead. Well, now we have ventilator, we have hard pacemaker. So it's much more difficult to define what death is. Typically. Death is defined as the end of life and life is defined before death. Ok. So we don't have really very good definitions. Intelligence. We don't have a rigorous definition, we know something how to measure it's called IIQ or G factors, right? And, and we're beginning to build it in, in a narrow sense, right? Like go alpha, go and, and, and, and Watson and you know, Google Cars and Uber cars and all of that, that's still narrow. A I and some people are thinking about artificial general intelligence, but roughly as we said before, it's something to do with the ability to learn and to adapt to new environments. But that is, as I said, also, it's radical difference from experience. And it's very unclear if you build a machine that has a G I, it's not at all, it's not at all clear that this machine will have consciousness, it may or may not. So let's ask it the other way, do you think if you were to try to build an artificial general intelligence system, do you think uh figuring out how to build artificial consciousness would, would help you get to, to an A G I? So, or put another way, do you think intelligent requires consciousness in human? It goes hand in hand in human or I think in biology, consciousness, intelligence goes hand in hand. Quay is illusion because the the brain evolved to be highly complex complexity. Via the theory, integrated information theory is sort of ultimately is, is what is closely tied to consciousness. Ultimately, it's causal power upon itself. And so in eu in evolved systems they go together in artificial system, particularly in digital machines, they do not go together. And if you ask me point blank is Alexa 20.0 in the year 2040 when she can easily pass every turing test, she can't just know even if she claims she's conscious. In fact, you could even do a more radical version of this thought experiment. We can build a computer simulation of the human brain. You know what Henry Markham in the blue brain project or the human brain project in Switzerland is trying to do, let's grant him all the success. So in 10 years, we have this perfect simulation of the human brain. Every neuron is simulated and it has alaric and it has motor neurons, it has a, a podcast area and of course they'll talk and they'll say hi. I just woke me up. I feel great. OK. Even that computer simulation that can imprint a map onto your brain will not be conscious. Why? Because it simulates it's a difference between the simulated and the real. So it simulates the behavior associated with consciousness. It might be, it will, if it's done properly, will have all the intelligence that that particular person they're simulating has. But simulating intelligence is not the same as having conscious experiences. And I give you a really nice metaphor that engineers and physicists typically get, I can write down Einstein's field equation nine or 10 equations that describe the link in general relativity between curvature and, and mass. I can do that. I can run this on my laptop to, to predict that the central, the black hole at the center of our galaxy will be so many that it will twist space time around it. So no light can escape. It's a black hole, right? But funny. Have you ever wondered, why doesn't this computer simulation suck me in? Right. It simulates gravity but it doesn't have the causal power of gravity. That's a huge difference. So it's a difference between the real and, and the simulator just like it doesn't get wet inside a computer when the computer runs code that simulates a weather storm. And so in order to have to have artificial consence, you have to give it the same causal power as a human brain. You have to build so called a neuromorphic machine that has hardware that is very similar to the human brain, not a digital clock for Neumann computer. So that's just to clarify the, you think that consciousness is not required to create human level intelligence, it seems to accompany in the human brain, but for a machine. Not of course. So maybe just because this is a G I, let's dig in a little bit about what we mean by intelligence. So one thing is the G factor of these kind of IQ tests of intelligence. But I think if you maybe another way to say so in 2040 2050 people have Siri. That is just really impressive. Do you think people will say serious intelligent? Yes, intelligence is this amorphous thing. So to be intelligent, it seems like you have to have some kind of connections with other human beings in the sense that you have to impress them with your intelligence. And there feels you have to somehow operate in this world full of humans. And for that, there feels like there has to be something like consciousness. So you think you can have just the world's best natural L LP system, natural language, understanding and generation and that will be, that will get us happy and say, you know what we've created in a gi I don't know happy. Yes, I do believe we can get what we call high level function, intelligence, particular sort of the g you know, this, this um fluid like intelligence that we challenge, particularly the place like mit right? In, in, in machines. I see a probably no reasons and I see a lot of reason to believe it's going to happen very, you know, over the next 50 years or 30 years. So for beneficial A I for creating an A I system. That's um so you mentioned ethics that is exceptionally intelligent but also does not do does you know aligns its values with our values of humanity? Do you think then in his consciousness, I think that that is a very good argument that if we're concerned about A I and the threat of A I ala Nick Bostrom threat, I think having an intelligence that has empathy. Right? Why do we find abusing a dog? Why do most of us find that abhorrent, abusing any animal? Right. Why do we find that um, abhorrent because we have this thing called empathy, which if you look at the Greek really means feeling with, I feel it pathos empathy, I have feeling with you. I see somebody else suffer that isn't even my conspecific. It's not a person, it's not a love, it's not my wife or my kids. It's, it's a dog. But I feel naturally most of us, not all of us, most of us will feel emphatic. And so it may well be in the long term interest of survival of Homo Sapiens Sapiens that if we do build a G I and it's really becomes very powerful that it has an emphatic response and doesn't just exterminate humanity. So, as part of the full conscious experience to, to create a consciousness artificial or in our human consciousness, do you think fear? Maybe we're going to get into uh your earlier days with Nietzsche and so on? But do you think fear and suffering are essential to have consciousness? Do you have to have the full range of experience to have to have a system that has experience or can you have a system that only has a very particular kinds of very positive experiences? Look, you can have, in principle, you can, people have done this in the rat where you implant an electrode in the hypothalamus, the pleasure center of the rat and the rat stimulate itself above and beyond anything else. It doesn't care about food or natural sex or, or drink anymore to stimulate itself because it's, it's such a pleasurable feeling. I guess it's like an orgasm just you have, you know, all day long. And so a priori I see no reason why you need um different, why you need a great variety now, clearly to survive, that wouldn't work, right? But if I engineered artificially, I don't think um I don't think you need uh a great variety of conscious expense. You could have just pleasure or just fear. It might be a terrible existence. But I think that's possible, at least on conceptual logical count cause any real creature with artificial engineer, you wanna give it fear, the fear of extinction, right? That we all have. Uh And you also want to give it a positive appetitive states, states that it wants to, that you want the machine encouraged to do because they give the machine positive feedback. So uh you mentioned panpsychism to jump back a little bit, you know, everything having some kind of mental property. Uh How do you go from there to something like human consciousness? So everything having some elements of consciousness, is there something special about human consciousness? So, so just it's not everything like a spoon. There's no, I, the, the form of Pentagon I think about doesn't ascribe consciousness to anything like this, the spoon or my liver. However, uh it is uh the theory, the integrated information theory does say that system, even one that look from the outside, relatively simple. At least if they have this internal causal power. They are, they, they, they, it does feel like something. The theory Apollo doesn't say anything what's special about human biologically, we know what the one thing that's special about human is we speak and we have an overblown sense of our own importance. We believe we are exceptional and we're just God's gift to, to, to the universe. But the, but behaviorally, the main thing that we have, we can, we can plan over the long term and we have language and that gives us an enormous amount of power and that's why we are the, the current dominant species on the planet. So you mentioned God, you grew up a devout Roman Catholic, uh you know, Roman Catholic family. So, you know, with consciousness, you're sort of exploring some really deeply fundamental human things that religion also touches on. So where does, where does religion fit into your thinking about consciousness? And you've, you've grown throughout your life and changed your views on religion as far as I understand? Yeah, I mean, I'm now much closer to. So I, I'm not a Roman Catholic anymore. I don't believe there's sort of this God, the God. I was, I was educated to believe in, you know, sit somewhere in the fullness of time. I'll be united in some sort of everlasting bliss. I, I just don't see any evidence for that. Look. The world, the night is large and full of wonders. Right. There are many things that I don't understand. I think many things that we as a cult, look, we don't even understand more than 4% of all the uh the universe, right? Dark matter, dark energy, we have no idea what it is, maybe it's lost. So what do I know? So, so all I can tell you is it's a sort of my, my current religious or spiritual sentiment is much closer to some form of Buddhism without the reincarnation. Unfortunately, there's no evidence for any reincarnation. So can you describe the way Buddhism sees the world a little bit? Well, so, you know, they talk about so when, when I I spent several meetings with the, with the Dalai Lama and what always impressed me about him? He really unlike, for example, let's say the the the pope or some cardinal, he always emphasized minimizing the suffering of all creatures. So they have this from the early beginning, they look at suffering in all creatures, not just in people, but in, in everybody this universal and of course, by degrees, right, in the animal channel will have is less capable of suffering than a, than a well developed um normally developed human. And um they think consciousness pervades in this universe. Uh And they have these techniques, you know, you can think of them like mindfulness, et cetera and meditation that tries to access sort of what they claim of this more fundamental aspect of reality. I'm not sure it's more fundamentalist. I, I think about it. There's a physical and then there's this inside view consciousness and those are the two aspects. That's the only thing I've, I have access to in my life. And you got to remember my conscious experience and your conscious experience comes prior to anything, you know about physics comes prior to knowledge about the universe and atoms and superstrings and molecules and all of that, the only thing you directly are acquainted with is this world that's populated with, with things and images and sounds in your head and touches and all of that. I actually have a question. So, um it sounds like um you kind of have a rich life, you talk about rock climbing and it seems like you really love uh literature. Um Consciousness is all about experiencing things. So, do you think that has helped your research on this topic? Yes, particularly if you think about it, the the various states. So for example, when you do rock climbing or now I do um rowing, cool rowing and a bike every day. You can get into this thing called the zone. And I've always, I wanted, I wanted about, about it particularly with respect to continents because it's a strangely addictive state. You wanna, you wanna, I mean, once people have it, once they want to keep on going back to it and you wonder why, what is it so addicting about it? And I think it's the experience of, of almost close to pure experience because in this, in the zone, you're not conscious of inner voice anymore. There's always this inner voice nagging you, right? You have to do this, you have to do that, you have to pay your taxes, you have to fight with your ex and all of those things, they're always there. But when you're in the zone, all of that is gone and you're just in this wonderful state where you're fully out in the world, like you're, you're, you're climbing or you're rowing or biking or, or doing soccer or whatever you're doing and sort of consciousness sort of it is you're all action or in this case of pure experience, you're not action at all. But in both cases, you experience some aspect of, of you touch some basic part of, of, of conscious existence that is so basic and so deeply satisfying you. I think you touch the root of being, that's really what you're touching there. You're getting close to the root of being and that's very different from intelligence. So, what do you think about the simulation hypothesis simulation theory. The idea that we all live in a computer simulation, have you given? I think it, it's as likely as the hypothesis had engaged hundreds of scholars for many centuries. Are we all just existing in the mind of God? And this is just a modern version of it? It's, it's, it's, it's equally plausible. People love talking about these sorts of things. I know their book written about this simulation hypothesis. If that's what people want to do, that's fine. It seems rather esoteric. It's never testable, but it's not useful for you to think of it in those terms. So maybe connecting to the questions of free will, which you've talked about. Um I, I think I vaguely remember you saying that the idea that there's no free will uh it makes you very uncomfortable. So what do you think about free will? And from the, from a physics perspective, from a conscious perspective, what is it all? OK. So from the physics perspective, leaving aside quantum mechanics, we believe we live in a fully deterministic world, right? But then comes of course, quantum mechanics. So now we know that certain things are in principle not predictable, which I, as you said, I prefer because the idea that the the initial condition of the universe and then everything else, we're just acting out the initial condition of the universe. That doesn't, that doesn't, it's not a romantic notion. Certainly not right now, when it comes to consciousness. I think we do have certain freedom. We are much more constrained by physics, of course. And by our past and by our own conscious desires, what our parents told us and what our environment tells us. We, we all know that there's hundreds of experiments that show how we can be influenced. But finally, in the, in the final analysis, when you make a life, and I'm talking really about critical decisions where you really think should I marry? Should I go to this school or that school? Should I take this job or that job? Should I cheat on my taxes or not? Right. The sort of these are things where you really deliberate and I think on those conditions, you are as free as you can be when you, when you bring your entire being, your entire conscious uh uh uh being to that question and try to ana analyze it on all the, the various conditions and then you take um you make a decision, you are as free as you can ever be. That is I think what, what free will is, it's not a will that's totally free to do anything it wants. That's not possible, right? So as Jack mentioned, you actually read a blog about books. You've read amazing books from Russian, from Bulgakov. Yeah, Neil Gaiman, Carl Sagan Maram. So what is a book that early in your life transformed the way you saw the world, something that changed? Your life, Nietzsche, I guess did thus spoke out twister because he talks about some of these problems, you know, he was one of the first discoverer of the unconscious. This is, you know, a little bit before uh Freud when he was in the air and, you know, he makes all these claims that people sort of under the guise of under the mass of charity actually are very non charitable. Um So he is sort of really the first discoverer of the great land of the, of the unconscious. And that, that really caught me. And what do you think? What do you think about the unconscious? What do you think about Freud? What do you think about these ideas? What's, what's just like dark matter in the universe? What's so over there and that unconscious a lot, I mean, much more than we think this is what a lot of last 100 years of research has shown. So I think he was a genius misguided towards the end, but he was all, he started out as a neuroscientist, but he contributed, he did the studies on the um on the lamp, he contributed himself to the neuron hypothesis, the idea that there are discrete units that we call nerve cells now. And then he started, then he, he wrote, you know, about the unconscious and I think it's true, there's lots of stuff happening. You feel this particular when you're in a relationship and it breaks a Thunder, right? And then you have this terrible, you can have love and hate and lust and anger and all of it is mixed in. And when you try to analyze yourself, why am I so upset? It's very, very difficult to penetrate to those basements, those caverns in your mind because the prying eyes of conscience doesn't have access to those but that they are in the Amygdala or, you know, lots of other places they make you upset or angry or sad or depressed. And it's very difficult to try to actually uncover the reason. You can go to a shrink, you can talk with your friend endlessly. You construct finding a story why this happened, why you love it or don't love her or whatever. But you don't really know whether that's actually the, whether that actually happened because you simply don't have access to those parts of the brain and they're very powerful. Do you think that's a feature or a bug of our brain? The fact that we have this deep, difficult to dive into subconscious? I think it's a feature because otherwise, look, we are, we are like any other brain or nervous system or computer. We are severely band limited. If we, if everything I do every emotion, I feel every eye movement I make. If all of that had to be under the control of consciousness, I couldn't, I, I couldn't, I wouldn't be here. Right. So, so what you do early on your brain, you have to be conscious when you learn things like typing or like riding on a bike. But then what you do, you train up, uh I think that involves gang and strid. You, you train up different parts of your brain and then once you do it automatically like typing, you can show you do it much faster without even thinking about it because you've got these highly specialized what Franz C and I called zombie agents that I can sort of, they're taking care of that while your consciousness can sort of worry about the abstract sense of the text you want to write. And I think that's true for many, many things. But for the things like uh all the fights you had with the ex girlfriend, things that you would think are not useful to still linger somewhere in the subconscious. So that seems like a bug that it would stick there. You think it would be better if you can analyze it and then get it out of, get out of the system or just forget it ever happened. You know, that, that seems a very buggy kind of. Well, yeah, in general, we don't have and that's probably functional. We don't have an ability unless it's extreme. There are cases clinical dissociation, right? When people are heavily abused when they completely repress the memory. But that doesn't happen in, in, in, you know, in normal people. We don't have an ability to remove traumatic memories. And of course, we suffer from that. On the other hand, probably if you had the ability to constantly wipe your memory, you probably do it to an extent that isn't useful to you. So, yeah, it's a good question, the balance. So um on the books, as Jack mentioned, correct me if I'm wrong, but broadly speaking, academia and the different scientific disciplines, certainly in engineering, reading literature seems to be a rare pursuit perhaps I'm wrong in this. But that's in my experience, most people read much more technical text and do not sort of escape or seek truth in literature. Um It seems like you do. So, what do you think is the value? What do you think literature adds to the pursuit of scientific truth? Do you think it's good? It's useful for access to a much wider array of human experiences? How valuable do you think it is? Well, if you want to understand human nature and nature in general, then I think you have to better understand a wide variety of experiences, not just sitting in a lab staring at a screen and having a face flashed onto you for 100 milliseconds and pushing a button. That's what, that's what I used to do. That's what most psychologists do. There's nothing wrong with that, but you need to consider lots of other strange uh states, you know, literature is a shortcut for this. Well, yeah, because literature that's, that's what literature is all about, all sorts of interesting experiences that people have. The, you know, the contingency of it, the fact that you know, women experience the world, different black people experience the world different. And you know, the one way to explain that is reading all these different literature and try to find out you, you see everything so relative, right? You read the book three years ago, they thought about certain problems very, very differently than, than us today. We today like any culture, think we know it all. That's common to every culture. Every culture believes that its heyday, they know it all. And then you realize, well, there's other ways of viewing the universe and some of them may have lots of things in their favor. So I this is a question I wanted to ask about time scale or scale in general. Uh when you with IIT or in general try to think about consciousness, try to think about these ideas. We kind of naturally think human time scales. So do you um or and also uh entities that are sized close to humans? Do you think of things that are much larger and much smaller as containing consciousness? And do you think of things that take, you know, you know, ages eons to operate in their conscious cause effect, cause effect? It's a very good question. So I think a lot about small creatures because experimentally, you know, a lot of people work on flies and bees. Right. So most people just think they are, they're just bugs for heaven's sake. Right. But if you look at their behavior, like bees, they can recognize individual humans. They have this very complicated, um, way to communicate if you've ever been involved or, you know, your parents when they bought a house, what sort of agonizing decision that is? And bees have to do that once a year. Right. When they swarm in the spring and then they have this very elaborate way. They have free of scouts, they go to the individual sites, they come back, they have this power, this dance literally where they dance for several days, they try to recruit other needs. It's very complicated decision where when they finally want to make a decision, the entire swarm, the scouts up the entire swarm and then go to one location. They don't go to 50 they go to one location that the scouts have agreed upon by themselves. That's awesome. If you look at the circuit complexity, it's 10 times more denser than anything we have in our brain. Now, they only have a million neurons, but the neurons are amazingly complex, complex behavior, very complicated circuit. So there's no question, they experience something. Their life is very different. They're tiny, they only live, you know, for, for while workers live maybe for two months. So I think, and it tells you this, in principle, the substrate of consciousness is the substrate that maximizes the cause effect power over all possible spatial temple grains. So when I think about, for example, do you know the science fiction story, the black cloud? OK. It's a classic by Fred Hoy, the astronomer, he has this cloud intervening between the earth and the sun and the sun. And um leading to some sort of to global cooling, this is written in the fifties, it turns out you can using the, the um the radio dish they communicate was actually an entity. It's actually an intelligent entity and they, they, they sort of, they convince it to move away. So here you have a radical different entity. And in principle, it says, well, you can measure the, the integrated information in principle at least. And yes, if that, if the maximum of that occurs at a time scale of months rather than in a sort of fraction of a second, yes. And they would experience life where each moment is a month rather than a microsecond, right? Rather than a fraction of a of a second in the, in the human case. And so there may be forms of conscience that we simply don't recognize for what they are because they are so radical different from anything you and I are used to. Again, that's why it's good to read or to watch science fiction movie. You want to think about this like this is, do you know Stanislav Lem, this Polish science fiction writer he wrote Solara. It was turned into a Hollywood movie. His best novel was in the sixties, very, very engineer, an engineering background. His most interesting novel is called The Victorious Where Human civilization, they, they, they, they, they have this mission to this planet and everything is destroyed and they discover machines, humans got killed. And then these machines took over. And there was this machine evolution, a Darwinian evolution. He talks about this very vividly and finally the dominant, the the dominant machine intelligence organism that survive gigantic clouds of little hexagonal universal sell out. This is what in the sixties. So typically they are all lying on the ground individual by themselves. But in times of crisis, they can communicate, they assemble into gigantic nets into clouds of trillions of these particles. And then they become hyper intelligent and they can beat anything that humans can, can throw at it. It's a very beautiful and compelling where you have an intelligence where finally the humans leave the planet, they simply unable to understand and comprehend this creature. And they can say, well, either we can nuke the entire planet and destroy it or we just have to leave because fundamentally it's an, it's an alien, it's so alien from us and our ideas that we cannot communicate with them. Yeah, actually in the conversation, cellular, talking to ST Steven Wolfram brought up is that there could be some ideas that, you know, you, you already have these artificial general intelligence, like super smart or maybe conscious beings in the cellular tome, we just don't know how to talk to them. So it's the language of communication. We just don't know what to do with it. So that, that's one sort of view is uh consciousness is only something you can measure. So it's not conscious if you can't measure it. So, so you're making an ontological and an epistemic statement? One is they are, they are, it's, it's just like saying they're multiverses. That might be true, but I can't communicate with them. I don't, I can't have any knowledge of them. That's an epistemic argument, right? So those are two different things. So it may well be possible. Look in another case that's happening right now. People are building these mini organoids. Do you know about this? So, you know, you can take stem cells from under your arm, put in a dish, add four transcription factors and then you can induce them to grow, to grow into large, well, large, there are a few millimeters. They are like a half a million neurons that look like nerve cells in a dish called mini organoids at Harvard at Stanford everywhere. They're building them. It may well be possible that they're beginning to feel like something, but we we can't really communicate with them right now. So people are beginning to think about the ethics of this. So yes, he may be perfectly right, but they may it's one question, are they conscious or not? It totally separate question. How would I know those are two different things if you could give advice to a young researcher, sort of dreaming of understanding or creating human level intelligence or consciousness, what would you say? Just follow your dreams? Read widely? No, I mean, I suppose with discipline, what is the pursuit that they should take on? Is it neuroscience is a competition? Cognitive science? Is it philosophy? Is it computer science or products? Um No, in the sense that OK, so the only known system that have high level of intelligence is Homo Sapiens. So if you wanted to build it, it's probably good to continue to study closely what humans do. So, cognitive neuroscience, you know, somewhere between cognitive neuroscience on the one hand, then some philosophy of mind and then a IA I um computer science, you can look at all the original ideas, neural network, they all came from neuroscience, right? Um Reinforce whether it's Snarky Minsky building is snarky or whether it's, you know, the early Schubel and Wiesel experiments at Harvard that then gave rise to networks and then multi-layered networks. Um So it may well be possible. In fact, some people argue that to make the next big step in A I, once we realize the limits of deep convolutional networks, they can do certain things, but they can't really understand but they don't, they, they don't, they can't really, I can't really show one image I can show you a single image of somebody, a pickpocket who steals a wallet from a purse. You immediately know that's a pickpocket right now. Computer system would just say, well, it's a man, it's a woman. It's a purse, right? Unless you train this machine on showing it 100,000 pickpockets, right? So it doesn't, it doesn't have this easy understanding that you have, right. So, uh, so some people make the, I mean, in order to go to the next step or you really want to build machines that understand in a way you and I we have to go to psychology, we need to understand how we do it and how our brains enable us to do it. And so therefore being on the cusp, it's also so exciting to try to understand better our nature and then to build, to take some of those inside and build them. So I think the most exciting thing is somewhere in the interface between cognitive science, neuroscience A I, computer science and philosophy of mind. Beautiful. I'd say if there is from the machine learning, from our, from the computer science, computer vision perspective, many of the research just kind of ignore the way the human brain works, ignore even psychology or literature or studying the brain. I I would hope uh Josh Tenenbaum talks about bringing that in more and more and that's, yeah. Uh So you worked on some amazing stuff throughout your life. What's the thing that you're um really excited about? What's the mystery that you would love to uncover in the near term? Beyond, beyond all the mysteries that you're already surrounded by? Well, so there's a structure called the Klaus. OK. So this is a structure, it's underneath our cortex. It's yay big. You have one on the left, on the right underneath this, underneath the insular, it's very thin, it's like one millimeter it's embedded in, in wiring in white metals. So it's very difficult to image. And um it has uh it has connection to every cortical region. And Francis Crick. The last paper he ever wrote, he dictated corrections the day he died in hospital on this paper. He now we hypothesize well because it has this unique anatomy. It gets input from every cortical area and projects back to every, every cortical area that the function of this structure is similar. It's just a metaphor to the role of a conductor in a symphony orchestra. You have all the different cortical players, you have some that do motion, some that do theory of mind, some that infer social interaction and color and hearing and all the different modules and cortex. But of course, what consciousness is, consciousness puts it all together into one package, right? The binding problem, all of that. And this is really the function because it has relatively few neurons compared to cortex. But it it it talks it receives input from all of them and it projects back to all of them. And so we are testing that right now, we've got this beautiful neuron reconstruction in the mouse called crown of thorn crown of thorn neurons that are in the cloud from that have the most widespread connection of any nerve neuron I've ever seen. They're very, you have individual neurons that sit in the cloud from tiny, but then they have this single neurons have this huge axonal tree that cover both IPs and contra cortex and, and trying to turn using, you know, fancy tools like optogenetics, trying to turn those neons on or off and study it. What happens in the, in the mouse. So this thing is perhaps where the parts become the whole, perhaps it's one of the structures. It's a very good way of putting it where the individual parts turn into the whole of the whole of the conscious experience. Well, with that, um Thank you very much for being here today. Thank you very much. Thank you very much."
